In the previous lecture when we were discussing
2-dimensional worlds, we introduced the concept
of a right-handed coordinate frame.
And, just to remind you, the right-handed
coordinate frame is constructed like this.
We draw the x-axis and then we swing the y-axis
up by 90 degrees.
A three-dimensional coordinate frame is actually
very similar to the two-dimensional coordinate
frame.
So, here is the two-dimensional right-handed
coordinate frame that we just introduced.
And, what I’m going to do do now is to rotate
that in three dimensions.
And, what we see is that the z-axis was previously
hidden.
Previously, it was sticking up at us out of
the screen.
To create a 3-dimensional right-handed coordinate
frame, we start in a similar way.
We draw the x-axis.
We swing the y-axis so that it makes an angle
of 90 degrees to the x-axis.
And then, we swing the z-axis upwards and
it also makes an angle of 90 degrees to the
x-axis and also makes an angle of 90 degrees
to the y-axis.
There’s a very close relationship between
the 2-dimensional and the 3-dimensional coordinate
frames.
Let me put down the two-dimensional coordinate
frame and here is three-dimensional coordinate
frame.
And, I can overlay the x-axis and the y-axis
and we see that the z-axis points upwards.
We refer to this as a right-handed coordinate
frame.
And, the reason we call it a right-handed
frame is the orientation of the axes can be
defined very simply using my right hand.
So, this is the x-axis.
This is the y-axis.
And, this is the z-axis pointing upwards.
So, whenever we’re doing work with 3-dimensional
coordinate frames, they are always right-handed
coordinate frames.
This particular coordinate frame that I built,
we have an x-axis and a y-axis and this one,
the z-axis pointing downwards.
This is a left-handed coordinate frame.
So it’s best not to use these, they are
going to cause you all sorts of grief.
So, don’t use left-handed coordinate frames.
Go with the right-handed coordinate frame.
So, just to recap.
When we create a right-handed coordinate frame,
we use this rule what’s called the right-handed
rule, and I take my right hand.
The x-axis is parallel to my thumb.
The y-axis is parallel to my index finger.
And, the z-axis is parallel to my middle finger.